New clock/calendar system for Europa, a moon of Jupiter. 
http://www.ludism.org/tinfoil/Europan_Clock_and_Calendar Comments, 
debugging welcome.

Mark Schnitzius 

I do indeed love this! But I have an issue with it.

Basing the day on the orbit of Europa around Jupiter would mean that 
position of the sun (and hence the lit half of Jupiter) would be 
drifting with every three-day cycle. If it was based on the (very 
similar) time between peri-suns (is that even a word?), instead then 
people there would get the sun on one side (cycling through an 
analemma, I'd imagine, but at least consistently), and the lit 
Jupiter on the other, every three eudays. Surely this would be more 
useful for a Europan denizen?

Ron Hale-Evans 

Hey, Mark, I really appreciate your feedback. Let me try to 
understand it. Are you suggesting that the euday should be 1/3 of the 
time between perihelions on Europa? Isn't the current euday duration 
already a pretty close approximation of that? (I'm using "perihelion" 
even though Europa orbits Jupiter and not the Sun.) Wouldn't the time 
of perihelion over an orbital period only drift a little, let's say 
not much more than sunrise and sunset times on Earth? It strikes me 
that if you adjusted the Europan epoch to be shortly after perihelion 
near the first day of the Jovian epoch, then perihelion would occur 
every Wednesday and Sunday indefinitely, or at least regularly.

If not, where am I wrong? You obviously know quite a bit about 
astronomy, so I'm one Big Ear. :)

Btw, it's important to me that the Europan timekeeping system be 
simple and regular. Because of artificial lighting, astronomical 
events, while important, are not all-important.

Mark Schnitzius 

> Are you suggesting that the euday should be 1/3 of the time between 
perihelions on Europa?

Yes, that was my suggestion. The time between perihelions would be 
close to the orbital period that you used in your calculations, but 
not equal. But let's look at basing it off the orbital period (around 
Jupiter) first, like your scheme does. (Europa being tidally locked 
means that fortunately we don't have to account for any additional 
rotation in this scheme.)

Viewing the Jupiter-Europa system from the top, the orbital period 
would be the time between when Europa is at twelve o'clock in 
relation to Jupiter, and the time when it is next at twelve o'clock, 
after one orbit. As Jupiter goes on its twelve Earth-year journey 
around the sun, then, sometimes this twelve o'clock position leaves 
you pointed at the sun, and sometimes away. So for any fixed point on 
Europa's surface, for six Earth-years your day would start in direct 
sunlight, and for the other six Earth-years, your day would start in 
the dark.

Basing it on perihelion would seem more simple and regular to me, 
given that that's how we do it on Earth. But, point taken about 
artificial lighting and such. Especially given how meagre the 
sunlight would be there, and how bad the radiation would be on the 
surface.

There may be other points in favor of the perihelion-based approach, 
like, when you're pointed at the sun, you're also pointed 
(approximately) at the Earth, and so that's when you'd want to do 
your communications. And basing the day on the perihelion also means 
you can know when Jupiter will be lit up in the sky, so you can go 
and gawk at it :) Seen from Europa, it would be the width of about 
six full moons IIRC, and always at roughly the same spot in the sky 
-- how spectacular would that be?

Ron Hale-Evans 

I like the perihelion proposal in general, but it seems to me either 
one would have to have irregular-length eudays or put up with a 
certain amount of shifting of the perihelion time. What do you think?

Mark Schnitzius 

I had to think about that a bit... I'm not sure. I think Europa 
orbits on roughly the same plane as Jupiter around the sun, and looks 
to have quite a circular orbit, so I don't think the eccentricity 
between perihelions would be huge. There's a good chance I'm 
misunderstanding or leaving something out though. I'd have to think 
hard just to compute how to calculate the mean time between 
perihelions, let alone the standard deviation.

I ended up learning an interesting thing as a result of this 
discussion... When thinking of the difference between rotational 
periods and perihelions, it occurred to me that this meant the 
Earth's rotation couldn't be exactly one day. And it isn't: it's 
0.997 days. So don't let anyone tell you the Earth rotates once a day!

Ron Hale-Evans 

Mark, if /you're/ having trouble calculating the eccentricity and 
mean time between perihelions, I'm not going to attempt it. :) It's 
probably too difficult and/or irregular to use as the basis of a 
calendar.

It looks like I erred with my math anyway, probably a rounding error. 
For more details, see the discussion on CALNDR-L below. So I'm 
redoing the calendar with maximum precision (in the data available to 
me) -- in a spreadsheet, to keep myself honest. Let me know if you 
want a Dropbox link.

http://calndr-l.10958.n7.nabble.com/Europan-Clock-and-Calendar-td18005
.html
